[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When I was younger, I
felt that, in the beginning,
that science would surely be a
source of benefiting mankind.
I had no question about it.
I began to feel that
something beyond science
would be needed to
approach this question.
>> It was a night and we
were walking under the stars,
black sky, and he looked up
to the stars and he said,
ordinarily, when we look to
the sky and look to the stars,
we think of stars as objects
far out and vast spaces between
them.
He said, there's another
way we can look at it.
We can look at the vacuum at the
emptiness instead as a planum,
as infinitely full rather
than infinitely empty,
and that the material
objects themselves
are like little bubbles, little
vacancies in this vast sea.
So David Bohm, in a
sense, was using that view
to have me look at the stars
and to have a sense of the night
sky all of a sudden in
a different way as one
whole living organism
and these little bits
that we call matter is
just little holes in it.
He often mentioned just
one other aspect of this.
That this planum, in a cubic
centimeter of the planet,
there is more energy matter than
in the entire visible universe.
>> David Bohm was a
physicist, philosopher,
explorer of consciousness.
The man Einstein called his
spiritual son and the Dalai
Lama his science guru.
But his ideas were a threat
to his peers in the science
community, as well
as to the government.
As a result, he would
pay a great price
for sharing them at a time
in history that was fraught
and with a world that was
not ready to receive them.
This is the story of his
life and his explorations
in physics, philosophy, and
consciousness and a search
for unity and wholeness at
the crossroads of science
and spirituality.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Since the dawn of
man, humanity has
been haunted with
fundamental questions
about the nature of existence.
Who are we?
Where did we come from?
What is our purpose?
What is reality?
>> Buddha himself expressed
to his fellow monks,
scholars should not accept
his teaching out of faith,
but rather thorough
investigation and experiment.
Therefore, we trained that way.
Always why, why, why, why, why?
Not easily say yes.
>> Classical physics promoted
mechanism by suggesting that
everything should be
predictable and controllable.
To see three dimensional
space as absolute.
Time as a singular
linear progression
and our sensory experiences
as reality itself.
But when one begins
to understand
the true nature of reality
and our place within it,
these assumptions
become obstacles.
Quantum theory was
born around 1900.
1905 saw Einstein's
theory of relativity.
Then in 1925, Heisenberg
looked into the heart of nature
and created quantum mechanics.
This was followed by
Niels Bohr's Copenhagen
interpretation.
Then quantum field theory.
This was followed decades
later by the famous theory
of everything, when
scientists started
to believe that the end
of physics was in sight.
1980s and 1990s we
developed a protocol,
a theory of everything that was
going to resolve everything,
but it somehow didn't
quite work out.
There's something missing.
Maybe we should look wider.
Quantum physics is the
description of the smallest
things in the universe.
The things that we do not see
in our everyday world of space
and time, such as
atoms, molecules,
and the tiny invisible
particles which
form the entire underlying
structure of the universe.
Quantum physics is also the
basis for multi-billion dollar
industries.
Every time you turn on
your mobile or tablet,
you're invoking the fundamental
laws of the universe.
It's a world that defies any
description that is limited
to ordinary space and time.
It's a mysterious place, where
relative space collapses,
linear time ceases to be.
Everything in the known
universe emerges from it.
Everything we are and everything
we do is dependent on it.
While all this is incredible,
the scientific orthodoxy
had not been able to
successfully reconcile
the two big breakthroughs of
the early 20th century, quantum
mechanics and
general relativity,
into a unified theory.
The equations that Einstein
wrote in the early 20th century
and the mathematics used to
describe quantum mechanics
simply could not
talk to each other.
They were fundamentally
incompatible.
And so physics
remained polarized.
Its chief protagonist,
Niels Bohr on one side
and Albert Einstein
on the other,
unable to agree on
what constitutes
the true nature of reality.
>> I mean, in a certain sense,
I can respect people like Niels
Bohr who said, well, OK, this
is what you're supposed to do,
don't ask questions.
But I don't like that
point of view of myself.
It doesn't make sense to me.
I said, no, no, we really want
a theory which hangs, together
and Bohm was a leading
figure in that,
and I think I very much respect
him in that particular regard.
>> Quantum mechanics is really
about explaining the properties
of the microscopic world, the
materials our bodies are made
of, our brains are made up at
the very microscopic level.
General relativity, or
relativity theory in general,
is about explaining the largest
cosmic dimensions spacetime,
gravity, the whole macroscopic
order of the cosmos.
And so you can imagine that
this macroscopic cosmic level
needs to be connected to this
super subatomic quantum level.
How can this be done?
And the two theories describing
these two realms really
can't do that, and they have not
been compatible with each other
since their inception and
since quantum mechanics was
developed there was a
tension between the two.
[LIGHTNING STRIKING]
>> Does this mean that the
two approaches can never be
resolved?
>> My interest moved more toward
understanding the fundamentals
of physics and quantum
mechanics and relativity,
and I became especially
interested in how it leads to--
these fundamental
theories are not clear.
That their basic
ideas are unclear,
and they contradict each other.
>> Bohm was thinking very
deeply about them and said, OK,
we don't need a new idea.
We don't need a new theory.
We don't need a new bit
of mathematics, which
everybody else was trying.
What we need is a radically
new order of physics.
>> As you can imagine, this
rocked the foundations that
have been set by the
founding fathers of physics,
but perhaps as Bohm
was suggesting,
it was time for a new law
to describe both the seen
and the unseen.
>> With that absolute
contradiction of the two basic
theories, I said, we could
try to find out what they had
in common, and what they have in
common is what I call undivided
wholeness.
>> Just as Copernicus had
upended cosmological thought
in the 16th century by
suggesting that the Earth was
in orbit around the
sun and not vise versa,
so too was Bohm starting
to intuit that we needed
a fundamentally new way to
describe the connection between
the macro and the micro.
>> My feeling is that that gave
an insight to Bohm that this
world we live in, this
is all hard and fast.
The experts could order.
This is it.
It's really just
a surface order,
it's not a deep profound
order, and there's
something lies
underneath it, which
he called the implicate order.
So the implicate
order is not so much
a set of objects but a process.
It's a process of
constant movement
constantly unfolding
and unfolding.
So the expected order
comes out of the implicate.
>> David Bohm was suggesting
that everything is internally
related to everything else and
that each part of the cosmos
contains the whole universe
and unfolds into our perception
of reality.
>> He would go into
biology and say, look,
this is the way biological
systems develop.
Nature is surely more
organic, and yet, we're
trying to do in our
quantum mechanics just
to make it mechanical.
Perhaps we should
move into that area
and say that there is a
more organic way of thinking
about life in general.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> That's the key.
That's the deepest
hidden level of reality.
The gate of all wonders.
>> Exploring the philosophical
implications of both physics
and consciousness, Bohm's
questioning of the scientific
orthodoxy was the expression
of a rare and maverick
intelligence in which
much of his most important
contributions were
expressions of inner feelings,
which date back to his
early unhappy childhood.
David was born in Wilkes-Barre
on December the 20th, 1917.
A coal mining town, once the
energy supplier of the world.
It had been hit by a serious
economic slump caused
in large part by the declining
use of coal as a source of fuel
in industry.
>> There was a great deal of
unemployment and suffering
and people were out of jobs
and banks were failing.
People were talking about
things getting very bad, even
revolution, and then
Roosevelt came in
and he produced all
these new measures,
which gave people
hope, you see, and I
think they lifted
things up a little bit
and gave people some hope that
at least it would get better.
>> His mother was hospitalized
on several occasions from
mental illness, and his father
was distant and disapproved
of his son's
interest in science,
hoping instead that David would
one day take over the family
business.
Life for the young
David was not ideal.
>> Bohm was unhappy.
He was unhappy at home,
unhappy with his father running
a used furniture sales shop.
Ambition was that Bohm would
own the biggest furniture sales
shop in Wilkes-Barre,
Pennsylvania.
Bohm didn't want to do that.
He wanted to explore
ideas, and his father
wasn't very happy
about that, and he
felt he lived in a
rather brutal world.
One day, he would hold up
a science fiction story
called "The Skylark of Space"
about a boy who travels off
to other planets in a spaceship.
That was his dream.
If I can go to other planets,
they'll be ideal worlds.
So for him, this
world we live in,
this world of space and
time is rather imperfect.
It's an illusion, and beyond
that is a much deeper reality.
That was his school
vision, and then
as he grows up
and becomes older,
that becomes his vision of what
he called the implicate order.
That beyond the everyday
Newtonian world view,
there's a much deeper order
he called the implicate order,
and that was what he
was groping towards.
How do we uncover this
deeper order of the world?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> One day with a
group of friends,
he was forced to cross
the stream by means
of steppingstones.
>> I was with some boys and
we were in the mountains near
Wilkes-Barre crossing a
rather rapidly flowing stream,
and there were a lot of rocks
we had to cross and they were
really far apart and very
small, and we couldn't just step
across them, and I
felt very apprehensive.
It was in the new situation.
But I suddenly realized you had
to jump from one to the other
without stopping in between it.
You were in a state of
movement, pivoting on one rock
while you move to the
next, whereas I usually
thought of going from
one step to another.
It was mapping out the steps.
After that, I felt that--
know it made a deep
impression on me,
that this theme has
recurred a lot in my work,
that your consciousness is going
moment by moment of awareness
and not mapped out.
>> Despite his father's
disapproval of his interest
in science, the young Bohm
proved to be an exceptional
student, writing his unified
theory of the cosmos,
one that integrated mind and
matter while still at school.
>> I think this was combined
with some tendency to want
to go beyond limits.
You see, when I was in this
small city of Wilkes-Barre
and see that the nearest
towns around that
were called Ashley, Sugar
Notch, and Warrior Run,
so that's all I knew.
I mean, I didn't know them.
I know about them.
And when we went for a
ride beyond Warrior Run,
it seemed like going
beyond the world, you see.
>> Having finished high school,
the young Bohm moved to Penn
State University, where he
graduated with a physics
degree.
His exceptional ability
in mathematics and physics
secured him a scholarship to
move to Caltech in California.
There, he met with
Robert Oppenheimer,
who was sufficiently
impressed with Bohm
to arrange for him to transfer
to the University of Berkeley,
where Oppenheimer headed
up the physics department.
With a sense of rejection
from his own father,
Bohm had sought father
figures, and it was clear
that Robert Oppenheimer
was to fulfill that role.
>> He became a student of
Oppenheimer to do a PhD,
and this was just before
Oppenheimer went off to set up
Los Alamos, the
nuclear facility.
So one day, when Oppenheimer
was going off to Los Alamos,
Bohm would have liked
to have joined him,
but he couldn't get
clearance, partly
because he joined the
Communist Party of America
for nine months, and then
what he was joining it
for was to try and see
if he could find people
so they could discuss
Hegel with them.
He finally wanted-- didn't
even know who Hegel was,
so he got totally disinterested
and didn't go again.
But because of
actually paying a fee,
he got smeared with communism.
Bohm's mathematical calculations
proved useful to the Manhattan
Project in their quest to build
the world's first atomic bomb,
but the brigadier
general in charge
told Oppenheimer that
Bohm was to be kept out.
He suspected Bohm might
be a communist spy.
Denied security clearance, Bohm
lost access to his own work,
making it impossible for
him to complete his thesis.
>> He said, I can't
write the thesis,
because the papers
have been classified.
And Oppenheimer said, OK,
just let's get the papers,
I'll give you a PhD.
>> Oppenheimer needed Bohm's
work and had a very important
job to do.
But little did Bohm know
that his early philosophical
idealism, coupled with
unfolding global unease,
would have a dramatic
impact on the trajectory
that his life would
take from now on.
>> The Americans were
building an atom bomb.
The Germans and the
Russians are at war,
and it's our duty to
help the Russians.
Many scientists,
including Oppenheimer,
felt we should talk
to the president
and suggest maybe we should tell
the Russians what we're doing.
In fact, the President of
United States at that time
was in agreement
with that, but it
was Churchill who overruled
him, and said, are you crazy?
No, know don't tell
the Russians anything.
But that was it.
There was a sympathy.
Maybe the Russians should know a
little bit of what we're doing,
so maybe there was
sympathy among some
of Oppenheimer's students.
>> Oppenheimer had gathered
around him a circle
of exceptional
research students.
Oppenheimer himself supported
communist organizations
and groups.
For Bohm, politics and
physics were inseparable,
and he soon discovered that
several of Oppenheimer students
were interested in what they
termed The Russian Experiment,
in which a Marxist
society would lead
to the transformation
of the individual.
This idea also played
into Bohm's work
in physics, where
he saw parallels
between the movement
of electrons
and the possibility of
individual human freedom.
This led Bohm to one of his most
important early discoveries,
the theory of the
plasma in metals.
>> A plasma is called the
fourth state of matter.
There's gases, there's
liquids, there's solids,
and the phosphate is like a
gas in which the gases are
charged particles.
So it would be a bit like
what happens around the sun.
You have a gas of charged
particles, and in a metal,
the idea was a metal you'd
have a lattice, where
all the nuclear in the
lattice, the charge.
An electron runs through.
There's a gas of
electrons running through,
and Bohm's idea was like,
can I look at the gas?
Can I find a theory
for this gas?
What he found was that
the extent to which
an electron participated in this
gas, it became relatively free.
So it went back to his old idea
about the Russian experiment.
To what extent-- if I am a
member of the collective-- can
I have individual freedom?
It seems a paradox.
If I'm a member
of the collective,
then I don't have freedom.
I'm part of the group.
But he found to the extent to
which an electron participated
in the plasma, it became free.
It became free of the
interaction of other electrons,
so he began to say,
yes, within the plasma,
within the collective, there
can be individual freedom.
So it was both a theory
of the plasma in metals
and the theory of freedom
in the collective.
>> Now having set up
that plasma physics,
he was recognized by
the people in Berkeley,
and he was offered a job
at Princeton University.
Remember, Einstein was at
the Advanced Study Institute,
but he was offered
a job at Princeton,
because they taught
him a very talented
young American physicist.
>> He went to Princeton, and
he took a room in a house next
door to Einstein so he
would meet Einstein,
they become close, he would go
to Einstein-- in the evening,
Einstein would have German
expatriates over playing
the cello, violin,
have concerts,
and he would go to those
and talk a lot to Einstein.
>> Dear Mr. Bohm, your letter
has interested me very much.
I am very astonished
about your announcement
to establish some connection
between the formalism
of quantum theory and
relativistic field theory.
I must confess that I
am not able to guess
how such unification
could be achieved.
>> Einstein said that he felt
Bohm was his spiritual son.
>> In this period, Bohm also
wrote a standard textbook
on quantum theory, which
presented the orthodox
Copenhagen interpretation
of the theory,
as outlined by Niels Bohr.
>> He then was asked to give
a course on quantum mechanics,
and he gave an orthodox
course on quantum mechanics.
At the end of the
course, he thought, well,
I don't really understand
this quantum mechanics.
So it's the best thing to
do if you don't understand
something is to write a book.
So he then wrote a book, which
he entitled "Quantum Theory,"
which had a reputation
of being one
of the best books on
quantum theory at the time.
He was describing standard
quantum mechanics,
Bohr's point of view.
He was trying to defend
Had a lot of discussions
about Bohr's point of view,
as well as some very
interesting applications
of quantum mechanics.
And it was there
by looking at Bohr
that he became very interested
in this notion of wholeness.
A notion, which he carried into
a much more general situations,
as he got clearer
and clearer how
wholeness was arising in the
quantum structure itself.
>> However, Bohm began to feel
that something was not quite
right about Niels
Bohr's interpretation,
believing that it placed a limit
on what could be said about
the quantum world.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The quantum domain is
the subatomic realm.
The world of the smallest
things in the universe.
All that is invisible
to the naked eye.
Since the 1920s, there
has been one experiment,
which puts us up against
all the paradoxes
and mysteries of nature.
The double slit
experiment, which
showed how everything we
assumed about electrons
since their discovery in the
19th century had been wrong.
If we fire electrons through two
slits, they start as particles,
but instead of creating
two distinct bands
on the wall and the
other side, they in fact
create an interference
pattern like waves.
In an effort to
decode this mystery,
physicists decided to put a
measuring detector by one slit,
but when they did, the
electrons did not produce
any interference pattern.
The very act of
conscious observation
collapse the wave
pattern, and the electrons
returned once again to
behaving like particles.
How is this possible?
What could be influencing
this curious behavior?
This paradox has
been an accepted part
of orthodox quantum physics.
One that Niels Bohr
claimed could not
be probed or explained.
But Bohm was developing
a strong hunch
that there must be something
underneath the seemingly
quixotic nature of electrons.
That there was a process
or a potential that somehow
informed their behavior.
>> Bohr had this idea that we
could not say anything about
the underlying reality, and
people have taken that also
to mean that they may not
be an underlying reality.
Einstein completely disagreed
with this point of view.
He thought there must be
an underlying reality,
and this underlying
reality would
produce the effects we actually
see in our instruments.
Now, the question then was,
what is the underlying reality?
>> Bohm was saying, yes, we
can talk about quantum objects,
we can talk about
the quantum world,
but the quantum world is
radically different from
the classical world.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Bohm felt that something
mysterious was happening,
and the key for Bohm is that
what we observe as distinct
and separate in our everyday
world of space and time is,
in fact, connected and not
separate at the deeper quantum
level, because they are part
of a single system where
separation does not exist.
But while Bohm continued
to be preoccupied
with such questions,
his communist leanings,
coupled with concerns at Los
Alamos about possible leaks
of classified information
to the Russians,
was to impact dramatically
on his life within physics,
and ultimately, his own view
of the scientific orthodoxy.
>> McCarthyism had suddenly
come back to the fore the Korean
War, and McCarthy was trying to
get people to testify against
colleagues at Berkeley
and Los Alamos.
And David Bohm was asked
to testify and he refused.
>> He was asked to give names.
He refused to give names,
and as a result of that,
he was arrested for
contempt of Congress.
>> He wanted to plead
the First Amendment,
which is freedom of speech,
but the lawyer suggested, no,
that will be a difficult
thing to get out of.
You must plead the
Fifth Amendment,
and the trouble with
the Fifth Amendment
is that it's essentially
preventing you
from incriminating yourself.
McCarthy was absolutely
frustrated with all
these people
refusing to testify,
so he put to the
Supreme Court that it
should be illegal to be made
illegal or unconstitutional
to plead the Fifth
Amendment in this case.
And one day, when
Bohm was in Princeton,
a Sheriff came and
actually arrested him,
and he was arrested because he
was using the Fifth Amendment.
The interesting
story here is that he
said the Sheriff was a
very intelligent Sheriff,
and they had a discussion on
the foundations of quantum
mechanics as he was
driven from Princeton
to Washington, which is
unbeliev-- but typical
David Bohm.
Then he was bailed, but
very shortly after the bail,
the high court ruled
that it was not
unconstitutional to plead the
fifth, and so he was released.
But because he had been
enmeshed in this mess,
the principal or the
head of the University
banned him from the campus.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Einstein actually wanted
him to become his assistant,
but Oppenheimer objected.
In fact, Oppenheimer saw Bohm
at Princeton once, and said,
I thought I asked you to get
out of the country, because I
think for your own safety,
you should leave the country.
>> This was crushing to
David Bohm on many levels.
Just as he was gaining
professional momentum
and respect within
the science community,
his own mentor and
surrogate father figure
was telling him to get lost.
Given Oppenheimer's
power at the time,
Bohm was quickly shunned
by peers and friends.
>> I know he did write to
Einstein asked him to help him,
but no.
The only thing was to leave the
United States and go to Brazil.
So he had no future
in the States.
He just had to leave,
and that was it.
[PLANE REVVING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Though he was able to
get a teaching position
at the University of Sao
Paulo, exile was a chilling
experience.
At Princeton, he had been
surrounded by friends.
His work on plasmas was
recognized as significant.
His book on quantum theory
was considered the best,
but Bohm found a way to turn
exiled to his advantage.
With this distance,
he was able to look
at the impasse between
Einstein and Niels Bohr
with new perspective in a paper
entitled "Hidden Variables."
>> Bohm realized that the
success of quantum mechanics,
success in predictions
of quantum mechanics,
and also the stability
where evidences
offer a new kind,
a new type of physical theories.
>> Well, he had really
questioned the orthodox
interpretation of Bohr and
Heisenberg and Copenhagen
interpretation, and he decided
to develop his own approach,
which he called
hidden variables.
>> In the decades to come,
hidden variables would become
a key component to Bohm's
intellectual legacy.
But in 1952, it
sparked hostility
and would serve to finish him
in the eyes of the physics
orthodoxy.
Bohm's hidden variables stated
that the behavior of quantum
particles were not
chance processes,
for the motion of electrons
were guided by underlying pilot
waves.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When he finished his paper,
he sent it for publication,
believing it would act as
a shock wave to physicists.
>> And that was what he wanted.
Some people say, no,
I want to be accepted.
No, it's not that I
want to be accepted.
I want to open the door to
the debate that he felt was--
with the Copenhagen
interpretation,
the orthodoxy had
closed the door.
There was a bit of controversy,
but let's close the door.
Let's all agree.
We'll all come together,
we'll come to Copenhagen,
we'll all have some meetings,
we'll have a lot of arguments,
but in the end, we'll agree, OK,
we all believe the same thing.
No, Bohm said, I
want to open it up.
So that's what he felt. And
when this paper comes out,
it will cause great controversy.
He's in Brazil, the
paper appears, nothing.
He hears nothing.
He only heard from one person.
de Broglie's assistant.
That's it.
He heard nothing.
And he was shocked.
Why?
Why is there nothing?
Why aren't people writing to me?
Why is there no controversy?
>> This deeply puzzled Bohm,
and it was only later that he
discovered the reason.
>> There was a student who had
read Bohm's paper in Princeton
when Bohm wasn't in the
country and took the paper
to Oppenheimer and said,
look, this is what Bohm wrote.
Nobody refers to it,
nobody's discussing it.
What's wrong with it?
And Oppenheimer said nothing.
>> And Oppenheimer had called
a conference at Princeton,
invited the leading physicists
to discuss Bohm's paper
and find a flaw in the argument.
And if we cannot find
an error in Bohm,
we must all agree to ignore him.
So word went out,
ignore Bohm, and that's
what Oppenheimer had done.
Ignore Bohm, and that was a--
for Bohm, a tremendous shock.
>> Few people laughed,
few people cried.
I remembered the line from Hindu
scripture the Bhagavad Gita,
now I am become death,
destroyer of worlds.
[EXPLOSION]
[MUSIC PLAYING]